submissions coming through, and I'm sure you've seen them, like we all have too,
that
people just don't have that kara āwhina, that language.
Look, I-
I get... I'm sorry. Sorry to interrupt.
I'm going to say, I get that there is that rationale
for it, but it seems to me that the confusion is even more so
at the moment.
Do you-
I-
Are you satisfied with that?
I am satisfied. If I read it as it is listed,
the hazards that are likely to result in death, like the
officials have said, it's a judgment call for any business owner
of what sort of action is
likely to lead to death. And I guess you could raise the
issue of could the word be reasonably foreseeable.
They're kind of the same thing, but slightly different definitions.
So, that would be something that would be helpful for you guys to test out in the
committee, but I'm not a legal drafter.
But the intention there is that someone is able to make a judgment.
Is an action going to lead to a death?
Is it likely to lead to that death?
I'm going to stop-
Is it reasonably foreseeable to lead to the death?
Sorry. I've just asked if I can ask a second.
Yeah, sure.
It's probably of both of you.
When that judgment's made, do those judgments,
do you know, do they take in the sort of metric like 50%
likely to occur or similar or more,
over what time period? Those are the kinds of things that would be useful for
us to know
with that, because again, it does cause confusion.
Is there that sort of metric that sits with it?
Well, there's not a specific number,
just like there isn't under the current Act.
Right.
And these are all things that people should be doing now.
Mm.
Basically what we're doing is,
once you've done your assessment, narrowing down
what you are actually going to be liable for as a small
PCBU.
So
there's still going to be, as there is now, the requirement to assess all your
potential risks.
Mm-hmm.
And once you've done that, you should know what your
critical risks are based on the likelihood of them happening.
And I'm not sure whether you can
ever give a percentage-
Mm
... likelihood of something occurring forward-looking.
You might be able to tell what has happened in the past, and that is useful
information for potentially predicting what's happening in the future.
And-
But I'm not sure you're going to get the level of
precision or accuracy.
Chair's prerogative before we move on to further supplementaries.
Do you see this as being any different to the current risk matrix that people
currently operate in, where it is risk of
it being really bad versus risk of it happening at all, and how that
extrapolates out for people to determine?
No. We're not trying to fundamentally upend that.
Thank you. So I've got a supplementary from Vanessa and then Pam Shear.
So,
there is multiple examples of how the
critical risk issue is skewed already.
One example is, in my electorate, Kiwi Rail
wanted to
put in a change of a level crossing.
They identified the risk as a critical risk
of
death to a pedestrian or a cyclist at
that
crossing of one in 1,000 years, and they deemed
that to be critical,
and so urgent that we must then
close, do all of these things. So, it's
the perverse nature of what critical risk is,
and the analysis of this,
actually
has some really huge implications.
And this is not a small PCBU, but
this whole question is one of the most vexed areas, and I'm not
sure whether or not we're going to get anywhere closer
with this to making it any better.
It's still open for interpretation regardless.
It's still massively open for interpretation. Yeah.
Can we move on to the supplementary from-
Yeah.
Pam Shear.
As most of our businesses are small businesses, ministers,
and how small businesses operate are, it's different
from big businesses in the terms of the kind of machinery or the equipment they
have. So their machinery could be more manual than big
businesses.
Mm-hmm.
So having that knowledge, how it is normal for that industry to have that
kind of manual equipment is really important because sometimes people will
see this kind of manual, big machinery compared to something that is automated.
Automated is much safer than something that is manual kind of thing.
Yeah.
And
does this assure us that labor inspectors will have that
knowledge of that industry, that this is actually normal for that manual thing?
Mm-hmm.
So they are not like, because if you compare one automatic machine versus
a manual machine, obviously the manual one would look like it's more kind
of risky because there is more manual involvement in that.
So how does this assure that the industry knowledge will
be there when those assessments are done?
Look, that's a really good question.
So that kind of, in some ways, sits slightly outside of the law
itself.
It is something that we heard a lot of on the roadshow, which is that
a lot of companies, when they had machinery,
And dealt with inspectors who weren't sure what they were looking at.
And that was leading to areas of
confusion around the country. One clear example for me was a
woman who came along to our Rosebank Road submissions,
and she had two factories, one in Christchurch and one in
Auckland. And the exact same machinery in both cities,
was told that it was compliant in one city-
Mm
... told it was non-compliant in another city-
... because of two different WorkSafe inspectors.
No.
That is some work that we have ongoing about the WorkSafe
training within the regulator function, which I'm
happy to come back to the committee at some point and talk about how we
actually make sure that the inspectors themselves understand the law-
Interesting
... and understand the requirements when they are trying to follow and
enforce the law.
Mm.
But
that won't be fixed specifically within this law itself, but more on the
operations side of WorkSafe.
But to the earlier point that came from our colleague Vanessa
about KiwiRail.
Mm.
I think the difficulty here is those sorts of actions are already happening
under the law that we've got at the moment.
Yeah.
But it ultimately is a
judgment decision for every PCBU to be able
to make. It's possible for WorkSafe to challenge them on
how they're
limiting their risks. But the important thing here is,
any company can always do more-
Yes. Mm, yeah
... if it wants to.
Yeah.
There is no requirement that people must follow,
like the earlier example of every specific type of action that would be listed
out in the law, but some companies may simply just
choose to do more.
But we've been hearing that there has been overcompliance at the moment
due to the lack of uncertainty in the current law.
And a good question for you to test through this process will be, does what
we have drafted get any clearer for some of those companies?
And Karl.
Thanks, Chair. To your point, Minister, where,
should this or when this passes into law,
do you see WorkSafe having any role or more willingness
to say to a
business, "You're overcompliant here.
You're
going too far. You can pull this back a bit and take some of your
resources and put them into other, more productive components of your
business."
It would be good if that happens.
It's a very good question. Look, I think the reality is that for a lot of small
business owners, they will be doing that themselves, because where
you have unnecessary overcompliance, it is a time
and cost waster.
Mm.
So for the directors of companies, as well as the managers on the
ground, I expect that they'll be looking to find cost savings where they
can. But the important thing is, even though they may be finding cost
savings, the intention of the law is still clear that nobody
should be dying, nobody should be seriously injured or
ill from the work that they are doing, and they must manage those critical risks.
Mm.
But we are essentially saying there is too much overcompliance, there's too
much cost going into areas where it's completely
wasted, and it's not actually helping keep anybody safer.
It's just simply leading to more paperwork and compliance.
Thank you. A good place for us to leave it.
Minister, we appreciate your time.
Thank you.
We look forward to hearing from our submitters and with your officials, and
thank you very much-
Thank you very much
... for this bill. All right.
Members, we will move swiftly on to Victoria University of
Wellington. We have Chris Peace and Professor Joanne Crawford with
us.
Together.
I assume in the room.
Welcome. We have 10 minutes with you.
That includes time for questions. Over to you how you use it.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. Thank you very much. My name is Professor Joanne Crawford.
I work for Festival of Health and Safety, working with Victoria
as-
I'm Chris Peace, senior lecturer in workplace health and safety.
What we wanted to talk about this morning, and we're going to talk for about four
minutes to allow you to have times for questions, is
when reading the amendment bill and writing our submission,
some of our major concerns.
The lack of evidence that this approach is going to work.
I
don't know if there's evidence out there in the world or not, but I think good
regulation needs to look at evidence first.
So moving forward,
we need to go back and look at that.
Our small PCBUs, we think there might be some confusion
on this.
Less fewer than 20 workers in a financial year.
Is that 20 full-time employees? Is that 30, well, 19?
Is that 38 part-time employees? What happens?
There's things there that we think need tightening up.
And continuing.
Yeah. Sorry, can I just interrupt for a moment?
Are you able to bring your microphone closer to you?
Yeah. Sorry.
It's not just me then, Phil.
Sorry.
No, no. It's okay.
I'm not usually this quiet.
Okay. When we look at SMEs,
they are the backbone of many countries.
97% in New Zealand.
But international research and New Zealand research highlights that in
some sectors, people are more at risk of fatality and
injury, and that remains a concern.
So, how are we going to support our SMEs going forward?
We look at WorkSafe prosecutions.
Sorry to interrupt.
Yeah.
And are you able to bring this right close and then potentially-
I'll try and speak up.
Yeah.
Sorry, I've been teaching for two days. My voice is going.
No, I understand.
Sorry, yeah.
Okay. So
WorkSafe prosecutions are mainly of small business, and there's
concern that this is going to limit growth of small businesses.
Suddenly you get to, you've reached 20.
Oh, we've got to suddenly start
doing much more.
We have concerns around managing only critical risks,
because that in itself is going to
potentially push all PCBUs to ignoring our chronic
risks.
And
when we look at the breakdown of the burden of harm, our
critical risks are 0.13%. Our
chronic risks, our ill health,
they are a much larger burden.
Mm-hmm.
And it's really thinking about, when I think
about the construction sector, and other sectors as an example,
you have a managing
company, then you have small PCBUs coming in and
how is this going to come down from the
managing company? I'm going to pass to my colleague Chris next.
Thank you. I haven't been teaching for two days.
My concern's, in talking to colleagues, the increased
complexity in the bill, and in particular in our submission you'll
find there are two decision trees.
One for every PCBU and one for small
PCBUs. And the decision process that a
thinking person in a PCBU will have to follow is
increased complexity. And because of increased complexity, there may
have to be greater use of other people to be
advisors and to work through new systems, which
increases the costs of compliance.
Joanne's already touched on it, the focus on critical risks doesn't do
anything for the $5.4 billion worth of
other risks that the country has to pay for every
year. The non-fatal, non-critical risks
that cause long-term harm to people.
Because of the way the bill is structured, small
PCBUs will not have to comply with a range
of legislation that currently everybody is expected to comply
with. As a result, best estimate,
650,000 workers in New Zealand will lose some
level of statutory protection for health and safety.
A final point, we do agree with the greater use of approved codes of
practice, but we are anxious that there should be greater
oversight of their development by regulatory agencies, and that's
essential to avoid capture by sector groups.
Chairman, that's I think us-
Thank you
... we're open to questions from you.
Yes, we have a few questions. The first from Phil Twyford.
Thanks for your submission.
Would you support the retention of the critical risk concept in
any form? I mean, does it have any utility?
When I talk about
critical risks, everyone thinks, "Oh, you're just anti them." No.
Critical risks have to be controlled in an organization, but
that doesn't mean you ignore the chronic stuff.
Mm.
And I think that's my real concern about this bill.
So,
in your submission you talk about the psychosocial harms
and cumulative harms. Do you
think there's a place for those harms in the critical risk
concept?
Yes, because if you're a large organization,
psychosocial hazards may be
one of your critical risks. But the same can be said for small organizations
too.
Mm.
If I can come back in that I don't support the
concept of critical risk because my analysis of
WorkSafe prosecutions is it's almost certain that
where people have died or suffered serious harm, they didn't believe it could
happen to them. It's a psychological problem we have.
"I've been doing this job for X number of years. This has never happened to me.
I've never seen it happen to anybody else, so it can't be a critical
risk."
That may not be true in the forestry industry, which is one of our worst performers
in the country. In psychosocial, there have
been instances,
one case that went through the employment court process,
Melville High School, where two teachers suffered severe
psychosocial harm, and it resulted in one of the largest awards
for damages that we've ever seen in New Zealand.
So yes, critical should include psychosocial if we're going to have such a
concept as critical.
Thank you.
I've got a question on the point that you made about evidence.
As a lecturer, have you not seen evidence for or against or
otherwise?
I've not done a thorough systematic search, I'll be honest.
But in terms of changing to an
unbalanced system where the focus is only on critical
risk, if you look at our comparators, Australia and the UK,
it's a balanced approach.
Mm.
So you have to consider it all. Or you have to consider the hazards
that your workforce are exposed to.
So.
All right. And I've got a question from Francisco and then Vanessa, but it's your
supplementary.
We may not have time as-
No. Okay.
Thank you, Chair.
Just a quick question around your point around 650,000 workers losing
statutory protection. Is there any other law that might cover them
in the space, or if they lose protection as a result of this law, they'll just lose
it altogether?
I don't think so. One that really struck me was
under 15-year-olds, young persons.
As I read the bill,
a young person will no longer be
a-prohibited from working at night in the
presence of machinery. If I've misread the bill, then that's
telling me something about the complexity of how it's written.
So think, a young person who is working at night
trying to move stuff in a business and
decides that they've been told perhaps not to use a forklift truck, but they
decide to use a forklift truck, and they have some
event that results in serious harm to them.
One of the first incidents I ever investigated was actually a 17-year-old
who was crushed underneath a forklift truck that overturned.
He hadn't been trained, and it was mechanically unsound.
That was something like 50 years ago that that one happened, but it's
resonated for me. Another fatality involving
one of a pair of twins who was killed at work
because of the way the work was laid out. It was his second day at work.
And this bill as currently drafted would
I think the bill will strip away. But that was a small business where that
one happened.
Yeah.
And I think as the bill goes, if the bill proceeds in its
current form, a lot of young people will find they have inadequate
protection.
Thank you.
Okay, and we do have time, Vanessa, for a very-
Good. Thank you.
With the chronic
conditions,
that has quite an impact on ACC.
Yes.
And if we were to suddenly stop
trying to reduce those injuries, the potential burden-
Yes
... ACC,
would that be your, yeah, protection.
Yes. I'm coming back on Monday.
Yeah.
I think yes, if we don't, we can prevent
some of these chronic harms.
And have we got any evidence that shows
that applying health and safety rules or changes in the
workplace has reduced the incidence of things like
tennis elbow, wrist issues, those kind of
things?
Yes. There's a body of research around musculoskeletal,
work-related musculoskeletal disorders and how we can do
that.
Mm-hmm.
And how we can use work design. Yeah.
Thank you. Right. We'll now move on.
Appreciate your ability-
Thank you
... to join us this morning and your contribution to this process.
And we'll move on next to Engineering New Zealand.
We have Richard Templar, Joe Bain, and...
It's just Richard and Joe.
Okay, I was going to say, either Joe's got two titles or there's a mystery
third person.
Right. As with the previous submitter, you got 10 minutes.
That includes time for questions, and it's over to you how you utilize it.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much. Kia ora. I'm Richard Templar.
I'm the Chief Executive of Engineering New Zealand. With me is Joe Bain.
Joe is the Operations Director of Motivated Design.
Joe is a specialist in all forms of engineering
safety and has worked in multiple instances
dealing with the root causes of industrial accidents.
So Engineering New Zealand has 23,000 members.
We are the representative body for the entire engineering profession.
We regulate the profession and accredit all tertiary engineering
qualifications. Our members across all
sectors build, operate, and assure safety systems,
provide technical leadership, and risk management advice that
supports compliance with health and safety.
Our first concern is the process and focus of the bill.
A lack of earlier policy work has meant that the
sector has had a limited opportunity and ability to comment on the
changes the bill now proposes. The breadth of the changes
proposed, particularly the move to a
size-based two-tier
model is unexpected. We would encourage the committee to seek
and publish the underlying evidence base and rationale for the
proposed approach so we can better understand the policy
intent. In terms of focus, health and safety
legislation must remain centered on preventing harm to
workers and other persons. We're concerned that the bill
weakens the consistent protections for workers and
creates further uncertainties. We foresee there's a chance that
the move to this bill will reverse New Zealand's recent health and safety
gains.
Over to Joe.
Thank you, Richard.
So I'm going to speak specifically to the introduction of the two-tier
system, the critical risk carve-out for PCBUs with fewer than 20
workers.
And in saying this, I run a PCBU with fewer than 20 workers.
Right.
My life would get easier if you pass this bill.
Great.
I don't want you to pass this bill.
It's a
twist.
The primary duty of care in the current Health and Safety at Work Act requires
that a PCBU and the people running it and making the decisions in it
understand their business, understand the risks associated with that business, and
conduct their business in a way that reduces the risk of those or that
reduces the chance of those harms or those potential harms occurring.
Whether a firm has 20 workers, 18 workers, 3 workers,
30 workers, 400 workers, if they're doing the same kind of work-
Mm
... the risk profile is the same.
Mm-hmm.
Introducing a carve-out whereby small firms only have to
focus on critical risks and large firms
have to
e-effectively stick to the same current wide-ranging, open-ended
primary duty of care is actually just saying to small businesses, "You don't
have to be as good at managing your business
because we've carved out this special set of conditions for
you."
The reduction of worker protections in small businesses is, well, there's a
significant risk of reduction in worker protections, especially given the way that
the-
Schedule of, critical risks has been drafted,
where the catchall term about
things likely to cause harm is a little bit vaguely worded, and everybody's going
to fall back on the scheduled list of risks.
It's not a great list. We're concerned about behavioral
incentives for businesses, the tendency that there will be to game the system
to keep headcount below 20 workers.
Mm-hmm.
And we are especially concerned about how this
carve-out would apply to-
Mm-hmm
... the upstream duties, and this is coming out as engineers.
Many of us work in design. I run a design firm.
Under this law,
when we're doing design work, and we have to design it for the health and
safety of people who will be affected by whatever we are designing,
we would only have to design for the critical risk.
And a firm with 10 more staff
than us-
Mm-hmm
... would need to take an open-ended look at all possible risks that could
accrue to people downstream from their design work,
and consider all of those, and make design decisions based on those.
That's not reasonable. So we don't support the
introduction of the two-tier system.
Thank you, Joe.
In terms of the two-tier system, it's really important
that these upstream duties, if the two-tier system is
adopted, are excluded, because otherwise you could have two
design firms designing, say, a large structure.
One has to take into account all the possible risk of health and safety.
The others would only be looking at critical risk, and that's inherently wrong.
In terms of the critical risks themselves,
there needs to be a much clearer definition.
There is a hybrid at the moment with the lists in Schedule 1A,
and then a catchall test, which uses the words, "Likely to result,"
which isn't clearly defined and is open to interpretation.
We recommend there be much clearer guidance.
Also in our submission, we've covered on other
aspects, including the need for psychosocial risks to be included.
This is particularly important to engineers, noting that in the
construction sector,
nine times as many people die from suicide as die from
accidents.
Mm-hmm.
And so that needs to be considered.
We're happy to take questions on any of these points.
Thank you. We have the first question from Grant McCallum, and then Pam Shepherd is
next.
Yeah. The small business
carve-out one, I'm just interested.
So
the
carve-outs come from the fact that some small businesses really struggle with
knowing exactly what they have to do and the overwhelming
requirements at times
of having to deliver the same. They haven't got the expertise of
a larger corporate with the professional person who just
spends their life working through this stuff.
And you've got a small business, they've got two or three employees, and they're
trying to make it all work,
and they're the ones that I think are really struggling with some of the
health and safety. They're unclear what their obligations are, and so
by simplifying it,
it would appear they have got that opportunity.
So I'm just curious as to why you're so against
those smaller businesses actually being able to
run a business much easier given the stress they're under.
You want me to field that?
Yeah.
So
when the Health and Safety at Work Act was passed, the intention was for it to be
followed up with renewed regulations, best practice guides,
codes of practice, a whole pipeline of supporting information,
and clarifying information, and tools for businesses, and
especially small businesses to use to comply with the law.
We never did that.
In the last 10 years, we just haven't had that pipeline of guidance.
And I agree, that has created a situation where a lot of small businesses don't
know what good looks like and don't know what they're supposed to do.
The solution to that is not to amend the only
part of our health and safety system that's actually reasonably modern.
It's to sort out the pipeline of guidance and regulation.
And if we want to provide more guidance
for small businesses about what good looks like, about how much they have to do,
let's do that
rather than
going back to the legislation and rechanging the framework,
so that now if you're below an arbitrary threshold of worker
count-
Mm-hmm
... you have to follow a different process for thinking about the risks associated
with your work.
Mm-hmm.
I think the playing field should be even for all business, regardless of size.
And if there are knowledge gaps to resolve, let's resolve the knowledge gaps.
Right. Can I make the next questions more succinct, please, Vanessa?
Sorry.
Sorry, Pam Shepherd then Vanessa.
So you said... No. Did you say Pam Shepherd?
Sorry, it was Pam Shepherd then Vanessa. Yeah.
So you said that businesses will be gaming the system to remain
small businesses.
What do you mean by that? Can you elaborate on that?
Because if you have a business with 17 employees-
That is right
... more demand for what you do, obviously you want to grow your business.
Are you saying that businesses deliberately will not
want to grow then?
What does actually-
I, I-
... you mean by saying gaming the system?
I think there hasn't been a system created by human beings in all of
human history that hasn't been gamed by somebody.
Because-
We're talking particularly about businesses wanting to grow.
Yeah, because any system creates incentives.
Mm-hmm.
Businesses will want to grow. The question is, how will they grow?
And the chances are, I think that some will choose to go, "Right, well, we've got
a team of 19 in the North Island. Let's start a new company in the South
Island, and we'll grow that as a separate entity,"
because that'll be easier than going over this fairly arbitrary
threshold, and suddenly the compliance framework and the system we have to
use to satisfy the law will change for
us.It creates this-
But anyway, isn't it?
Yeah. Phenisa?
It can happen anywhere.
Yeah.
Thank you.
My question is around the
unintended impact on upstream duties.
Mm-hmm.
Is there not a professional obligation-
Exactly
... for engineering design-
Mm-hmm
... to
design well, rather than it being a health and safety law
implication?
There is. And at the moment, there is a very neat and tidy alignment
between the legal obligation on the PCBU-
Yeah
... and the ethical obligation on the professionals working within that firm.
Yeah.
The interests are aligned, the obligations are aligned.
If we change it so that the PCBU is only required to
design for critical risks, but the individual engineers or
architects or whatever, working within that firm have an ethical duty that
goes beyond that,
suddenly we have a misalignment of incentives and expectations, and
in that lies risk.
Okay. Thank you very much for your time. We need to move on to our next submitter.
Appreciate-
Thank you
... your participation in the process.
Our next submitter is Alan Brent from the Federated
Mountain Clubs of New Zealand.
They're joining us via Zoom, so hopefully that's all working now.
Hello there.
Hello, Alan. Are you able to turn your camera on?
We don't have to see you, we'd just like to.
Yeah. I
would like to. I'm just working through some
IT gremlins as per usual.
Good morning.
Good morning. We have 10 minutes with you this morning, Alan.
The time is yours to use as you wish, but it does include time for questions of
you.
Yeah. Thanks, Madam Chair.
Well, good morning everyone, and first of all, thanks for having us.
Yeah. My name's Alan Brent. I'm from Federated Mountain Clubs of New
Zealand,
which is around about a 100-year-old organization,
representing 20,000 people across a
broad part of the outdoor recreation community.
But today I'm speaking on behalf of 15 organizations,
representing
an even broader part of that community.
So, people from hunting, fishing,
tramping, white water, free flight,
climbing.
So, a really broad chunk of the outdoor community
I'm speaking on behalf of today.
Just like to start by saying we're
coming into this process having had a significant amount
of
interaction with officials and the minister, and we want to
say thanks for that as well.
And the reason we're so
humble on it is that this is a bill about work, and we're
here today bringing issues that are not about work.
We're talking about recreation.
So
our core underlying issue is
that the Health and Safety at Work Act was designed, as so
far as possible, to eliminate risks in workplaces, and
we're not talking about workplaces.
The
regime, if you want to call it that, has
crept into recreation, and it's got to the point
where it's causing undue difficulty and
we say that it's starting to impinge on one of the things that
makes New Zealand a great place to live.
Mm-hmm.
We've
set out in our submission,
which I take you'll have read a bit-
Mm-hmm
... but hopefully you've read this.
We've set out five issues,
but they're really in two key buckets.
The first bucket has to do with
concerns from landowners,
that they have liability
under the act towards recreationists.
We've set out a great
bunch of detail and examples in our submission there.
So, this issue really started winding up
when WorkSafe prosecuted the landowner
in the Whakaari White Island tragedy, 2019.
But a good example of it, probably for lots of you folk,
would be an urban one, and it's the Auckland Grammar
School rock wall, the Quarry, as it's known.
So this is the birthplace of serious rock climbing in New Zealand.
Very hard climbs. I've been lucky to get up a couple of them once or twice.
They're that hard. It was hewn out by prisoners to make
Mount Eden a prison,
back in the 1880s, I think it was.
And it operated for
over 50 years as that,
I suppose, proving ground for the entire New Zealand climbing scene.
So you think of Sir Edmund Hillary and things like that.
Now, this closed shortly after the passage
of the act in 2015. Okay? So
this is a really good example of...
We don't want to guess at the motivations of the Auckland Grammar School board,
but it's a good example, I think. We've been told at least that there
are perceived liability concerns.
So that's a little bit about landowner liability
concerns, and we've set out a number of detailed
proposals for sort of addressing that.
The second bucket has to do with club liability
issues.
And again, these are issues of
perception.So, your
previous
submitter, a gentleman from Engineering New Zealand, talked about a lack of
guidance
in his area. Over in the recreation zone, we've hit
a different experience, which has been
detailed guidance
flopping around,
which has been really difficult for small clubs who are
volunteers. They don't know what their liability is.
Mm-hmm.
And the latest iteration of the guidance, which I understand isn't
finalized, has it that a small tramping club who
employs a part-time cleaner would
have full health and safety at work act duties
for all of their trips and stuff into the backcountry.
Mm-hmm.
So completely unrelated issues.
We understand the legal logic of this, of course, but
we say that the practicalities of that are wrong.
So yeah, two buckets. There are a couple of other
lesser issues, things like fixtures and fittings on
land installed by recreationists, things like maimais.
But we'll leave it there in view of time, and happy to take any
questions.
Thank you very much, Alan. Can I just ask,
do you see the intention of this bill and the
definition between
recreational and workplace, that in a workplace it's the responsibility of the
PCBU, and non-workplace, it's the responsibility of the
individual? Is that how you see the definition becoming as a result of this change?
Well, recreationists voluntarily take on risk on their
own.
Yeah.
So, I mean, that's a nutshell-
Yeah
... if you want. Yeah.
Cool. Thank you. Do we have any further questions?
And can I just say, Alan, in no way is the lack of questions a lack of interest.
You've got a very succinct and clear submission, so I want to thank
you for that. And we can give you three minutes back in your day.
Thank you very much.
No worries. Thanks for your time, and thanks for all your work.
Appreciate it.
Thank you. Excellent. So much.
Awesome.
Thanks.
We'll move on now to the Law Association of New Zealand, who are joining us on
Zoom.
We have Brett Harris, who's the convener.
Good morning.
How are you, Brett?
Good. Thank you.
We do like to see your face. We don't have to, but we like to.
So if you want to turn your camera on.
I'm working on that. Thank you.
Here we are.
Hopefully
you can see me
now.
Wonderful. We have 10 minutes with you this morning, Brett.
The time is yours to use as you wish, but it does include time for questions.
Well, thank you very much. Good morning, and hopefully you have seen the
submission from the Law Association of New Zealand.
Yes.
Was dated on the 18th of March, and most of you might
recognize that name and brand from the Auckland District Law Society years
ago. So I'm the convener at the moment of
the Health and Safety Committee, a specialist group of
about 15 lawyers that include WorkSafe representatives and
prosecutors,
insurers, barristers, and specialist lawyers in this
area. Myself, I've been doing this work since, excuse me,
about 1999. So I've been involved
in this area for quite a long time and was involved in Whakare, sadly,
in the first stages,
for the Buttle family.
We, as a group, have tried to pull together in the time available
our collective thoughts on where you're heading as a
group looking at improvements, and therefore,
genuinely, we're impressed with the
attention to coming back to what can be done to
improve health and safety at work.
That includes
a, I suppose, for you, a balancing of making
things easier for business, compliance, red tape,
and certainty. But also from our perspective, we would like to
see a little more detail or linking with how
to reduce our harm, our injury, and illness
statistics.
Mm-hmm.
So trying to make sure that these amendments and any amendments that are made, the
committee would urge you to keep focused as
much as you can on reducing our rates of harm and injuries
and death. And sadly, I'm involved in a lot of cases where people have
died at work. So the reality is, it continues to
happen. We do see improvements, and the act has
made a number of changes, but I heard from earlier
submissions, and I would endorse the Engineering
New Zealand submission on what was expected
around
regulation.
So one of the things that the act in 2015, 2016 expected
was that we would also see more information, that we would
have more guidance and material available.
There are submissions on ACOPS, which I'm happy to
address you on. But we do think that
increased regulation might-
Oh, Brett. We've lost you.
Frozen.
Like what?
What a cliffhanger.
Be well-placed as you look to amend smaller PCBUs, yeah.
Sorry?
No, that's okay. We lost you briefly.
It was a real cliffhanger, but you've carried on.
It was me?
Do you mind just repeating... If you could repeat the last sentence, that would be
really helpful.
Apologies. I thought I had a good connection.
The smaller PCBU's are quite a
focus in the bill.
Yeah.
And so we would, as a committee, encourage you to look
also at what you can do by way of further regulation.
You're doing it with reviews of ACOPS, approved codes of
practice.So, please keep up what you're doing
to try and make things more certain.
But on the balance, our committee, I think, would
say that we have fears, that might be a slightly
exaggerated word, but we have fears that the desire to create
certainty might create some ambiguity or
uncertainty. So that by talking about critical risks,
by changing the legal definitions and
duties of what certain size companies might need to do.
And when you're thinking about workplaces, I'm in the Britomart area,
as we've seen quite a few buildings go up here, you can imagine that there is
a
host of different companies that pull together to
build some of these big buildings.
So some of them might be specialist plasterers or smaller companies.
But there will be major players in construction,
so you could create a workplace with
different tiers of legal status duties, and that
might be a concern, an unexpected
concern from what you're trying to deliver.
Brady, are you open for questions now or have you frozen again? Oh, you are.
Yeah.
Can I just start with a question?
We heard earlier from the Engineering Association about a
smaller firm designing
differently, right? And that didn't quite make sense to me, because if you're
designing a site, assuming your site is managed for the number of
people you've got,
would you then think that there would need to be potentially for project
site-specific requirements rather than organization-specific requirements?
Would that provide clarity in terms of, let's
just say you're building a bridge.
You might have your own organization that you're responsible for.
There's less than 20 people, however, on a site you've then all of a sudden
got 60 people all working around increased risk.
That seems to me to be a bit more logical than saying, "Well, I'm now
designing, just because I've only got 20 people in my workplace, I don't have to
take into account when I go onto a site."
Good question. Apologies, I missed that part of the engineering submission.
No,
that's all right.
But I suppose I hate using abbreviations, but we have an
important safety abbreviation, a SSSP, a Site
Specific Safety Plan. So I always believe i- in the
advice that I provide, and I think most of our committee, that you do need to
have systems in place for the general type of general work that will
be undertaken by your workers. But that when you get to a
specific site, and even as I say to some clients on
an hourly basis with weather and wind
changes for cranes, for example, then your site-specific
risk management has to be real, it needs to
be dynamic, and it needs to be real.
When I say real, it
can't be sitting in a folder somewhere.
It needs to
react to what's happening.
Thank you. Vanessa?
Thank you. This is along a similar line.
If you are an employer or you're setting up a business and you have
contractors and various people coming in under that,
some businesses might rely on having the same
practices for health and safety. If you
go into this and you might have 60 people already, but you're
actually going to rely on a business that's got five or
10, whatever. But you'd still have responsibility for the
health and safety outcomes of those workers,
if they were working on your project or whatever.
But you are now going to have
potentially a confusing line
between
the ability to oversee this and where the responsibility lies.
That's just a concern that I'm starting to have
in hearing from submitters. Do you think that could be a confusing element when it
comes to the liability of the PCBU?
Who is the PCBU in this case, and
they
will no longer be able to rely on the fact that
the other directors in the smaller company have the
same liability as they do
and requirements under the law.
Yes. And apologies, I've only heard some of the earlier submissions.
That's okay.
But what I would say is that there's a positive here in that the
new-ish 2015 legislation does now
have a joint PCBU expectation to cooperate,
coordinate, and consult. So there isn't just a pyramid
of responsibility for one particular PCBU
or an upwards chain of responsibility.
That the expectation is that everyone will share and consult,
and everyone ought to be working to make sure that every
workplace is as safe as possible. But when it comes to
the task of WorkSafe's legal team, the regulator
itself, and deciding on who's responsible, they will always look to,
typically, the larger entities with the greatest control over the
work that's being done. But they do, and they ought to,
look down the chain of responsibility to see who has
influenced or could or should have influenced
some other mechanism to keep the work safe.
Okay, thanks.
Great. Next question from Carl Bates.
Thanks, Chair. In your submission, you refer to not being aware of any
evidence demonstrating New Zealanders have been prevented from participating in
recreational activities due to landowners' health and safety concerns.
I'm wondering if you've had an opportunity to review the Federated
Farmers submission,
and their
expressed-Focus on quieting concerns
of landowners and recreational land users alike.
And if you haven't, if you accept for a moment that there
is a concern around recreational land use,
what would you do differently to address
that concern?
Great question.
Thank you. You're looking at paragraphs 4.2 and 4.3 of
my submission or our-
Yeah
... submission as a committee. So you'll see that that was some members'
view in 4.2.
I will put my hand up and accept that I was the one that decided there was actually
a difference of opinion in the committee.
Mm-hmm.
So 4.3 is inserted to say that there are differing views on this.
I was originally engaged for the owners of Whakare for the first year or so,
and I am regularly being asked about uncertainty about
the use of rural land and the ability or the
directions that should be imposed on people that might come through
land. So my view differs from some of the others on the committee,
and I do believe that greater certainty in this area
will help. But if you look down at paragraph 4.5 of my
submission, and based on some work that I've been doing, I'm aware of
the latest policy clarification from WorkSafe, which is February
2026.
Yeah.
And I do believe that there is better guidance now,
and the regulator and the advisors, the legal team, are now
looking more realistically at what can and should be
done where someone is actively or passively permitting someone to come
across land. So I don't know if that helps.
There are differing views in our committee on this.
So, to-
We've actually run out of time, unfortunately.
Yeah.
We're going to have to move on to our next submitter.
But thank you very much, Brett, for making yourself available, being part of the
process.
That's all. Thank you.
We now move on to St Peter's-on-Willis Social Justice Group,
Gail Duncan, Stephen Jenkins,
in the room. Wonderful. Welcome.
As you've heard previously, you have 10 minutes for your submission.
That includes time for questions. Over to you how you use it.
Thank you very much.
Kia ora, Katie. Thank you very much.
I appreciate your introduction, and the Social Justice Group
expresses our thanks to this committee for the opportunity to
speak.
We are a group of concerned parishioners of St Peter's Anglican
Church, Te Ara Wellington, and we're here to represent the
voices of the last, the least, and the lost, the most vulnerable.
This bill places the most importance on the burden
on business of work health and safety culture and
awareness, inhibiting business opportunity for growth.
In our opinion, growth has been given greater importance than
health and safety
over work and worker wellbeing.
This package that addresses the pain point of businesses may not
be a package that addresses the real risks faced by
workers,
and will be implemented at the worker's cost, with success
measured by the number of fatalities and not by the number of
illnesses, diseases, or incapacitations prevented.
Non-fatal consequences will not be recorded.
The impact on ACC, the burden to our health providers, and the
loss of work potential will not be factored in.
The bill is winding back the balanced framework to secure health and
safety of workers and protect them from harm that is currently offered
to minimize regulatory intervention.
Education and guidance between industries and, or to
industries by the
regulator never achieves compliance with risks
that ought to be thoroughly regulated and allows avoidance of
responsibility and costs that should've been incurred to
implement the responsibilities associated with
safety.
The principal purpose of this bill is only managing critical risks,
whatever they might be determined to be.
How could the business owner enforce the wearing of earmuffs or safety
glasses to prevent a non-fatal consequence that harms a worker?
A small risk could be when a gas detector alarm goes off
occasionally, probably just the setting of the alarm.
No need to worry. Perfectly okay to go into that
confined space. It's not on our critical list.
But we can't talk to the 29 men lost at Pike
River to inform them more appropriately or their management.
The value of life does not sit well with this bill.
If there are fewer than 20 workers, does this mean that their lives
are less valuable than those in large industries?
Seasonal workers. A fluctuating workforce is one where there are
less than 20 for 9 of 12 months, maybe
300 at the peak of the season. Are those lives worth less?
The bill is not a backstop to public health and safety.
What legislation is the backstop?
How the market reacts to these reforms will be the key determinant
of whether they are successful or not, not the health of workers.
We know the market will do the least, never over-complying
to ensure business growth.
We're also concerned that WorkSafe's financial performance will be
impeded by operating within its fiscal envelope.
WorkSafe is expected to implement this with their existing
resources.
The Fitch report has just downgraded New Zealand to an AA+.
They will consider governance reducing regulatory
quality as part of the equity
element in their next analysis, which could downgrade us further.
I'll pass over to Steve Jenkins
Thank you.
Originally, I came to give a little bit of technical support,
but late last night, I decided I'd speak from the heart.
For 50 years, I've been working with construction
industry and working with processes,
and I've been working along the lines of
making people aware that health and safety is
actually part of the social license that you have to
operate an industry in New Zealand.
This bill seems to deny that license.
The bill is not about
saving paperwork.
This bill is about productivity,
and the productivity it's about is the people at the bottom of our
productivity pyramid.
The people who work with their hands,
adding value to the products that we take to the
market.
The bill sits at the interface
between productivity
and safety.
Productivity is often driven
by incentives, by piece work payments, by shift
targets.
And people achieve those, they get a reward.
They don't achieve them, they get a penalty.
Obviously, they're going to work as hard and as fast as they can,
and they will ignore the basic safety rules that they've been taught.
The bill is about allowing small industries,
a major part of the economy,
to ignore the minor safety work
that
is fundamental.
It talks about major risk,
but what is a major risk? For me, cutting a tendon in my hand
and not being able to work is a major risk.
For me,
damaging my lungs because I have to breathe
volatile carbons
in my workplace and I don't know about it
is a major risk. These are the things that we've got to
work to resolve.
So this bill,
in a sense,
is not about safety.
It's about
parents that can't go to watch their kids play football because they
can't stand still for an hour because they've had a broken foot.
It's about parents
who can't hear their children whispering their secrets to them
because they lost their hearing in a very
noisy work environment.
It's about seeing the world through one eye for the rest of your
life
if you have an eye injury.
It's not being able to turn the pages in a book
because you've lost dexterity through either RSI or
perhaps physical injury to your hand.
This bill is about all those things,
and our submission is
the people who
suffer this don't complain.
They don't speak in fair forums like this. They're not heard.
They tend to be treated as a replaceable asset.
They can't work, we'll find somebody else.
That's not the way that a fair, just
society works.
The bill is, in my view,
not fit for purpose, and it should stop, and it should not proceed.
Over to you.
Thank you. We'll wait for any questions.
Thank you. We have a question from Phil Twyford.
Yeah, thanks for the submission.
So the
stated intention of the bill is to improve the performance and the
operation of the health and safety system, and you've made the argument that
it'll do the opposite.
What would you do instead to improve
the system?
I think we say that in our very last little bit of
the conclusion,
that the government should focus on promulgating industry codes of
practice. I realize those will be done,
but training and assistance to employers, small and large, to
identify and manage risks. That's all risks, because a small risk
can often be one that a worker,
say, getting a little cut on their finger could mean something quite dramatic
that ought to be looked at and managed to prevent a
fatality in future.
And
which would include auditing and accreditation.
Those are costs, but the costs are tiny compared to the
total of the business.
A simple example would be testing costs to
prevent foodborne illness in the meat
industry
as a safety thing and will only
cost about that much, point something percent of the billions of
dollars earned, and it's the same with a smaller business,
relatively speaking.
One of the things that you need to understand
about small industry
is
often there's somebody who is a key player, a key
operator, very good at their job, very efficient,
and possibly working dangerously to them.
Mm.
The business owner suffers a huge loss when that person
leaves because they've got an injury or they can't
performPeople need to understand that we've got a
huge infrastructure of safety units,
standards, WorkSafe,
all those
issues. They don't seem to feature in the thinking.
Thank you. That's all the time we have for today with you, and appreciate your
participation in this process.
Thank you very much.
We now move on to Responsible Care New Zealand.
We have Barry Dyer and Keith Clark.
Moment.
I'm sure you've heard, 10 minutes, includes time for questions.
Have you got some supplementary papers to hand around, have you?
We have.
We might just pass that to Eve to-- thank you very much.
No
problem.
Right.
Please start. Don't wait for us to get our papers, otherwise we'll lose time.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and honorable members.
We welcome the opportunity to endorse some aspects of this
bill, with a focus on chemical safety.
And it's been interesting to read some of the submissions
that all take the view that we need to be better
informed about the hazards relating to the
chemicals we all rely on every day to
maintain our quality of life.
Now, be under no illusion, all chemicals are
hazardous,
particularly if they are not well managed.
And the goal of the association has been to
provide the means by which every
business,
and every business has chemicals involved,
safely manages their inventory.
Now, we endorse the minister's opening statement.
We have complex legislation which is not widely
understood.
Mm.
There is a cost of compliance to businesses where the risk
varies from very low to extreme,
and we are not getting the support we need from
various agencies involved in the
management and enforcement of our chemical
regime.
Now, the Chemical Industry Association has an enormous
advantage in that this is now the second
iteration of chemical legislation we have lived
through.
The first was the much-criticized
but nonetheless world-class Hazardous Substances and
New Organisms legislation,
which brought us kicking and screaming into a modern
regime for managing chemicals.
Mm.
We've learned a great deal from that,
and we can now apply many of those positives
to the situation facing workers
and business operators with the Hazardous
Substances Regulations.
Innovations under the previous HSNO regime
included
individual training for workers called approved
handlers.
A brilliant concept, poorly delivered as it turned out,
but nonetheless worthy of reinstitution.
And we've heard a great deal about codes of practice, and I'd just like to make
the point at this stage, the perception of industry codes
of practice are bookshelves lined with
documentation.
On the contrary,
you will see my colleague here
will hold up an example
of a code which saves thousands of hours
of research on the part of small business operators
to see what can be safely stored with what.
In addition, a simple checklist like this
can again provide a business of any
size with a ready reckoner on are they
addressing the key issues, and if so, to the standard
required. And that's something that could be presented to a
visiting workplace inspector.
We enjoyed a very fruitful, mutually
beneficial business relationship with the former
Department of Labor, who had within it a specialist
cell to deal with the implementation of the
chemical management regime.
Our part in that included helping to upskill
workplace inspectors and the compliance
certifiers.
We also developed a suite of codes of practice, some of which you
have before you,
and we helped
conduct
countrywide workshops at no cost to the
participants, which attracted nearly 6,000
people.
And that alone got the new legislation off
to a good start, and I'd suggest something similar
today would be a big help in addressing many of the
concerns that we've heard expressed in these
various submissions.
Now, there are three things involved here.
One is codes of practice. It takes industry to
develop a code of practice, but there is a process, and that is
the robust international standards approach
where all stakeholders are involved.And then
drafts are widely circulated and honed down
to a document which is extremely useful and is
user-friendly, as opposed to less
user-friendly regulations.
You can have as many codes as you like, but the basic
advantage is codes can be quickly
upgraded if they are not achieving the purpose.
The second thing is, where do you get information from?
I don't know of any business operator who gets up in the morning and says, "Who can
I kill or maim today?" What they do say is, "For God's
sake, tell me what I've got to do and how to do it,
and we will."
Yeah.
And that's the conundrum we have. How do we get that information
out there to the willing,
and in the process, identify the unwilling so we
can help put them out of business?
There are three things involved. One is that we don't
believe that that relationship that we enjoyed
under the Department of Labor now exists with the government
agencies involved in hazardous substances,
and there are nine of them.
Secondly,
you've got to provide people with the means to do
what they intend to do.
And in that regard, it would be a mistake
to have two tiers of business
compliance requirements.
Yes.
A two-person business mismanaging a chemical
inventory could destroy a small suburb.
It doesn't matter about the staff numbers,
it matters that they don't have the
in-house capability to do what they're required
to do efficiently and cost effectively.
And to our view, that's where a major role can be played
by various industry associations to get out to their
members and complement the service provided
by upskilled workplace inspectors
who know more than they currently do about safely
managing and enforcing chemical regulations.
Yes, sir.
And the final point, very briefly, is that we
need to overhaul the regulations.
The regulations are a mess. We were promised a
review. It hasn't happened. It needs to be done
sooner rather than later.
Questions. Thank you.
Right. Thank you. We look like we have time for one question, and my first
question is Parmjeet Parmar.
Yes. A quick clarification question.
So chemical incidents, we all agree, can be really, really dangerous.
Yes.
But in SMEs, do you have any evidence
like that is a big problem, mishandling of things, which is
leading to a big number of incidents?
And how does that sit, the numbers of incidents because of chemicals,
sit in relation to other critical-
Yes
... risks that we can kind of identify as
critical risks?
You'll see in our submission reference to two things.
One is site assessments, and secondly, we run a 24/7
emergency response system. And I'll ask Ken here to quickly
respond to your question about the incidents that we are
aware of, which don't reach the public domain.
We actually, every year we get approximately, we get at least 200 to
250 calls,
of varying natures. Some of them are very minor, through to significant
events.
And we... This
is, they can be days long,
through to minutes long. Quite often, very, very often
is severe trauma.
And
I haven't done the figures this year, but it's at least 60%,
for example, eye injuries,
in the small businesses.
Mm-hmm.
All right? That's a standout,
that just bugged... That's the one-
The big gap is that businesses were often run by people,
it was their life's work. Today, that's not true, and that's particularly true
of workplace inspectors.
Mm.
They don't come from industry anymore.
And they lack that understanding of all of the
environmental aspects of a workplace.
Thank you.
That's all the time we have with you this morning.
We appreciate your participation in the process.
Very good submission. Thank you.
Yeah. Thank you.
Yeah. Excellent. Thank you.
Um,
good luck.
It was really good.
Yes.
We now move on to Federated Farmers.
We have David Burkett, I believe, in the room, but Jade McCormack is
online.
She's not in.
Oh, she's not. Okay.
Yeah.
It's all you, David.
Is that possible?
Yes. Apologies from Jade. She's, um, unable to attend today, so.
That's okay.
Um-
10 minutes for you there, David, and over to you.
You've heard the, you've heard the spiel.
Good morning, Madam Chair and members of the committee.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today to speak on behalf of the
Federated Farmers submission on Health and Safety Amendments Bill.
My name is David Burkett, national board member of Federated Farmers and
spokesperson for health and safety.
And as I mentioned, unfortunately, Jade is not present today, and her
apologies.
I am here to speak today on Federated Farmers' submission, and I'll recap
the key points in our submission, and, we'll have...
And open to answer questions at the end.
Federated Farmers supports the overarching aim, that being
to reduce unnecessary
compliance burden, making the system more workable, particularly for small
businesses, and to ensure that the core purpose of the Health and Safety
Act is preserved, and that is to keep people safe at
work.We will focus on four points today.
The first one being the proposed
PCBU carve-out
for small businesses,
and we'll have some real-world examples of how that plays out in
agriculture. Two, the clarification of duties
relating to recreational uses on farmland.
Three,
the approved codes of practice and moving them to a
safe harbor.
And four, the alignment of WorkSafe's objectives with critical risk
prioritization.
Firstly, the PCBU carve-out.
We want to begin by acknowledging that Federated Farmers is committed to
improving health and safety outcomes in agriculture.
As a sector, we know our record needs to improve,
and we consider the progress requires sustained cultural
change.
Federated Farmers is actively supporting this shift.
We are members of Safer Farms, and we engage regularly with their
initiatives. We strongly support the Farm Without Harm
strategy
and an industry-led pathway for safer rural workplaces.
We also maintain a constructive and productive working relationship with WorkSafe,
including participating in sector forums, feedback on
guidance, and practical collaboration on engagement with
farmers.
These partnerships reflect the shared commitment to harm
reduction and better safety outcomes.
However, we acknowledge our position on the proposed PCBU
carve-out differs from Safer Farms.
That difference stems not from us having different goals for
improving safety within the farming sector, but from our membership
composition.
Federated Farmers primarily represents
owner-operated farms who often employ three to four on
average employees. Safer Farms, by comparison, draws
heavily from industry bodies, including large corporate
farming structures. As noted in our submission,
farms with a corporate structure often have the ability to,
with
professional governance regimes
and also have dedicated health and safety staff and have far
greater administrative capacities.
For many small farms, the current regime seems to require the
same breadth of documentation and systemization as corporate
scale operations,
and this has been overwhelming.
Instead of enabling engagement and improving health and safety
outcomes, it is often creating confusion and, worse, a sense of
fear of getting it wrong.
Despite significant compliance efforts since 2015,
agricultural harm rates have not meaningfully improved,
which strongly suggests that the complexity alone does not drive
safer outcomes. Farmers need clarity, not volume.
This is why Federated Farmers supports a small PCBU category
focused on managing critical risk,
the risks
that are most likely to result in death or notifiable harm.
A clear, proportionate starting point will help small businesses engage with health
and safety in a meaningful and confident way,
something that is considered essential for the cultural change that is needed.
At the same time, we strongly recommend removing the carve-out for
upstream PCBUs.
Farmers rely on manufacturers, importers, and suppliers for the
safety of plant and equipment. These technical risks
farmers cannot reasonably assess themselves, and a two-tiered system for
upstream duties
would compromise safety.
Recreational access to farmland.
We support the bill's intent to clarify landowners' responsibilities
around recreational access. The current uncertainty has caused
many farmers to restrict access out
of concern for liability.
However, the proposed exemption hinges on the term open space,
which is undefined. Without a clear definition and practical examples,
the ambiguity that currently deters
the access will persist. We therefore recommend clarifying
the meaning of open space to ensure that provision
work is as intended
by the act.
Approved codes of practice. We strongly support the elevation of approved codes of
practice to a safe harbor.
This will provide valued guidance and, particularly for
small farming businesses, certainty by offering a
clear, authoritative pathway for meeting
the duties.
However, we are concerned about allowing other organizations to propose an
ACOP.
To maintain quality and consistency across industries, we recommend
that objective content criteria for ACOPs,
assessment requirements to ensure sector and technical viability,
and mandated review periods to keep ACOPs current.
WorkSafe objectives. We support aligning WorkSafe objectives
with the focus on critical risk.
But for this to be effective, it must be supported by dedicated
guidance for agricultural contents,
consistency in inspector practice, which has been a
challenge for us all, and adequate resourcing for engagement and
education.
Farmers want clarity and consistency, and this support will be
essential to ensure the new framework is
workable.
Madam Chair, members of the committee, thank you again for the opportunity to
present today. Federated Farmers supports a health and safety system
that remains strong in its protection, but also proportionate and
practical and effective for small businesses.We
believe the bill, if refined as we have suggested, can
support the cultural and practical improvements needed across our sector.
Open to any questions.
Thank you. As you could expect, we have a question from Grant McCallum.
David, how are you? How would you describe the level of stress and
worry that currently sits in this space in the farming sector
currently?
Yeah. It is a bit of, fear is a big word, but-
Mm
... people fear that they'll get it wrong and there's prosecution will become.
So we've heard from a number of submissions today about clarity.
Mm.
And I think that is probably the key thing here is, and I think hopefully the
ACOPS will provide some of that clarity.
Yeah.
With having a safe harbor and knowing that if you follow those ACOPS, that gives
you some certainty-
Yeah
... I think will go a long way towards giving the confidence.
But saying that, it actually does come back to the culture-
Mm
... and, we are working collectively as a sector to try and-
... get a culture where when people start an activity,
the first thing that they think about is, "What is the health and safety
requirement-
Mm
... for the next 20 minutes of this activity?" So that's the point where we
want to get to and, I think this bill and amendments
goes some way along the path of achieving that.
But there's obviously going to be cultural changes needed as well.
Thank you.
We have a buffer. All right. Pam Sheikh.
Thank you. So your point about the requirement for
PCBU's to engage with workers. So is this, you think that there
could be more risks that PCBU may not be able to recognize and
workers might, so the list can be kind of more,
kind with the view of both workers and PCBU, or is
it about sharing responsibility? So exactly what are you saying there?
Yeah. The responsibility should be shared.
Every person within a business has a responsibility to health and
safety.
Mm.
And yet a large portion of that does fall back to the PCBU,
but, when a PCBU does put
all the requirements in place, provides training, guidance,
and those incidents still happen,
we must look and see, well, where did this incident come from, and what was
the main cause? And sometimes that is
beyond the PCBU's control because,
the person involved obviously hasn't fulfilled or
followed the requirements of the PCBU.
So I think there's a real focus making sure that the responsibility of
health and safety is on all people within a business.
Great. Thank you very much.
Thanks, David.
That's all the time we've got with you today.
Yeah.
Do appreciate-
Thank you
... you being here with us and part of this process.
And we move on now to ShopCare. We have Selina Armstrong and
Paul Harrison.
Thank you. Ten minutes with you, that includes time for questions. Over to you.
Selina Armstrong. I'm the Chief Executive of
ShopCare, and I've got Paul Harrison with me, my Program Manager.
We fully support smarter, pragmatic, and more proportionate regulation.
I want to start by saying that. But this bill, as it currently stands, creates
significant risks that in our view have not been adequately
assessed. We support the development of more
ACOPS. The issue that we have though is what happens when their
legal status changes from evidence of good practice to deemed
compliance.
This elevates administrative instruments to the legal effect of
regulation without any parliamentary scrutiny.
Mm.
And we can't find evidence that ACOPS replacing regulations is
effective. As far as we're aware, this is not done
in any comparable jurisdiction internationally, and our
experience tells us to follow the evidence of good practice
always.
We believe the smartest, most effective way to support all businesses
is by following the guidance of the independent task force established
after Pike River to complete the regulations in full,
like Australia and the UK have done.
Their health and safety record surpasses ours, and unsurprisingly, this is an
area where they have undertaken the work that we have not.
By doing this, we can give every business the level of detail that's
required to follow minimum standards, and ACOPS are then developed
alongside the regulations to provide best practice guidance for
individual sectors and hazards.
The bill also introduces a two-tier system where small
PCBU's with fewer than 20 workers manage only critical
risks. This distinction requires PCBU's to make
judgment calls about whether or not hazards are likely to result
in death or a notifiable injury. Precisely the kind of
assessment that small businesses find most difficult.
To demonstrate the complexity of this, the regulatory
impact statement submitted by MB incorrectly
states that armed robbery is not a critical risk in retail.
Mm.
The entire retail industry accepts that violent and aggressive
behavior is a critical risk,
and retailers large and small see this as a high priority harm
requiring effective controls to manage, which is why the Crime Amendment
Bill is currently under consideration.
If government can't get this right,
what hope do small businesses have to identify their
critical risks correctly?
No one would argue against the principle that businesses should prioritize their
most serious risks. But by requiring small businesses to
only focus on critical risks, we're not addressing the
majority of harm that workers are facing every day.
Because that harm actually sits below the critical risk threshold.
In manufacturing, musculoskeletal claims account for approximately, well,
just over half of ACC's active claims, and the pattern is
similar across retail and
warehousingAnother key concern we have
is how the bill reorganizes WorkSafe's statutory
functions to prioritize guidance and education over
enforcement.
International evidence consistently shows that regulatory deterrence
is an essential complement to education and not an
alternative.
The Pike River Royal Commission identified the decline of effective
enforcement as a root cause of the regulatory failure that
contributed to 29 deaths.
Unfortunately, this pattern is familiar in New Zealand's history.
We have a tragedy, inquiry, recommendations,
reform, followed by gradual erosion.
We urge the committee not to allow this bill to become another
chapter in that cycle and remove the statutory hierarchy.
List all of WorkSafe's functions as equal.
If the hierarchy proceeds, ensure that enforcement is co-equal with
education.
The new Section 35 compliance with other laws shifts from
discretionary to deemed compliance, and this assumes that
other regulatory regimes provide equivalent health and safety protections for
workers. Simply put, they don't.
The Land Transport Act was not designed as a comprehensive health and safety
framework. Maritime rules address vessel safety, not
worker health. Aviation rules cover flight safety, but not the
ground crew risks. Freight companies already
navigate multiple acts. The deemed compliance provision adds a
new legal interpretation exercise to determine which
HSWA duties overlap with which other enactments.
For small operators, this is a big task for those least
equipped to do it.
The regulatory impact statement does not assess compatibility
with the ILO Convention 155, which is now a
fundamental convention which New Zealand has
ratified, the EU Free Trade Agreement or the
CPTPP labor provisions.
Reducing duties for 97% of businesses and
deprioritizing enforcement with our regulator
creates tension with all three obligations.
The EU FTA is particularly significant.
The non-regression clause prohibits weakening labor laws in
a manner that encourages trade or investment.
We're not trade law experts,
but what we'd like to see is that the committee require MB
and MFAT to jointly assess and report on compatibility with
our international trade obligations before the bill proceeds.
And finally, only four employer or business groups were
consulted. No unions, no worker representatives or safety
associations, or ACC, MFAT, or Treasury.
When a bill reduces the legal obligations of businesses to
address worker health and safety, surely workers themselves should
be engaged. The independent task force
recommended that tripartite consultation occur at every
level. This hasn't happened, and given the gravity of the
impact to workers, this is a concerning omission.
The consequences of reduced duties to keep workers safe have life-altering
outcomes. It's not a matter of if, but when we will see an
increase in harm for our workers if this bill proceeds.
For business, this results in a loss of productivity, increased
costs with workers off for extended periods of time, increased
ACC levies, because ACC must spread the cost of
harm across the system as it's already hemorrhaging costs.
This is all without considering the impact to whanau, communities,
and our ability as a nation to grow productivity and position
ourselves alongside our peers in terms of harm reduction for
workers.
Kiwis deserve health and safety laws that keep them safe from harm,
and unfortunately, these amendments do not achieve that. Kia ora.
Thank you very much. We have our first question from Shanan Halbert.
Joanne, thank you for that thorough submission.
I guess at face value, the minister would say that this is
trying to increase business certainty.
But in your submission, you've outlined a number of areas that probably
make it more uncertain than certain. Additional expenses.
You talked about a lack of evidence just then.
Can you just dig a little bit deeper into why you think
that that is more uncertain than certain for businesses?
Sure. Well,
small businesses have to make decisions then that they don't currently do now.
Everybody has an obligation to do all that's
reasonably practicable to protect their workers in the workplace.
Now we have to have businesses deciding what is critical, what is non-critical.
If we're operating in a work environment where we have multiple
organizations, so we've got small and large PCBUs,
what do we actually do in that position?
Do we follow the large PCBU? The small PCBU's
then actually don't have to comply under this new
amendment. And as well as that, I think
small businesses will need to engage health and safety experts
to understand what their obligations are, not just determine
that let's look at all reasonable risks, right?
And do whatever is reasonably practicable to address all the risks that
are currently in existence.
Sumeeta.
Just as a follow-up. So the minister
said this morning that this brings a new set of
guidelines that are aimed to support small businesses,
because currently they feel somewhat spooked by WorkSafe.
What's your view on that, and how do guidelines, I guess, achieve-
The safety for workers in the workplace.
Well, it's rare to hear that people are spooked by
WorkSafe. We very rarely hear of inspectors on sites these
days because the system has been gutted.
The worksheets?
Right. So,
I
have no evidence to support that statement at all.
Paul, would you add anything there?
Yes, certainly. Traditionally, historically, there's been other avenues to actually
help small businesses with information rather than just guidelines.
I previously worked in the Department of Labor in the Small Business Information
unit,
prior to Pike River, where the Department of Labor had an entire unit
whose job it was to actually work with associations,
media, anyone they could, to actually get information to small
business, and then take feedback from small business and put
it through into the agency and policymaking.
So there are other mechanisms as well that can be employed by the
regulator to actually help give that information to small business.
There isn't much point in having a whole lot of information
without knowing how you actually get it to small business, and how you
provide them with forms of assistance to enact that information.
Thank you. That's all the time we have with you today.
We appreciate your participation in the process.
Thank you.
And we'll move on now to Stand with Pike, and that's Rob
Egan.
Okay.
That can do.
That's good.
Kia ora koutou. My name's Rob Egan.
I work,
I want to say for, but I'd like to think with, Anna and Sonia
on matters related to Pike River.
We have provided a short submission.
I'm sure everyone's read it. So Anna's going to have a
bit of a short discussion about
the impact of these laws within the context of
Pike or future Pike. So is Anna, so is Sonia, and then
we'll probably move to questions straight after that.
Anna.
Kia ora everyone. My name's Anna Osborne, and on the 19th of November
2010, my husband, Milton, was killed at Pike River.
I loved him like life itself.
He didn't have to die. It was not bad luck or an act of
God.
He was killed by a company that put its profit ahead
of life
and the lives of 28 others, and that was allowed to happen
by years of people, people sitting in the same seats
you are now,
weakening the health and safety laws and regulations again
and again.
This should never have happened, and the travesty
of justice that followed is a blight on New Zealand's
soul,
and will be until the people who killed Milt
are held to account.
In 2014, the law was changed and strengthened.
Not enough,
that's why we have been fighting for corporate manslaughter ever since.
But enough that workplace deaths and injury rates were held
at bay despite the population of the country growing
larger.
Enough that people could be confident in speaking up, and
employers began to feel they needed to listen.
Milt always looked out for his people.
He was a volunteer fireman, a local counselor.
I have always thought that among all the bad that came from Pike,
he would have taken some heart that the fact his death helped
keep others safe, even just by a little bit.
This bill takes that away. It takes it away from every
person at work in New Zealand, and it takes it from the
memory and the legacy of Milt and all the men he is
lying with in that s******e of a mine.
Kia ora.
Okay.
My name is Sonia Rockhouse, and my son, Ben, is in that
s******e with Milton.
I know exactly where he is. His body was found in borehole
footage shot during the investigation that we fought so hard for,
but he's far away, buried so deep.
That is why I'm here today, taking the tiny bit of time we've been given to
speak for him,
to bring who he was into this room, because he sadly cannot speak for
himself.
Ben was a gentle boy, highly intelligent, and very articulate.
He was very kind, and he was very fair with people and believed they were good.
I don't know what he would have made of how hard we've had to fight for truth
that should've been ours by right.
We should never have had to fight, protest, and campaign for
justice, accountability, or truth.
I hope he would be proud of his mum.
I don't even know what to think of this right now, of the fact that we are having
to come here again to tell people yet again
about the consequences of taking people's rights to health and safety
from them.
I can't understand how a minister who told us herself that she has not
even read the report of the Pike River Commission feels
qualified to propose that.
It feels like the authors of this bill have failed to learn from history.
They have willfully ignored it, and it makes me sick and
angry.
Is this why they're rushing this through, to hide from the
shame of what they are doing?But we will
not let them hide.
To wind back health and safety, despite the price our men and us,
their families, have paid, despite the fact that all of New Zealand
has seen that cost, shameful does not even begin
to describe it.
Everyone has the right to go to work in the morning
and come home safely from their
shift.
As I mentioned earlier,
the way that Anna and Sonia have looked at this is through the context of
Pike.
We've drawn out four particular points, and
we're more than happy to take questions about them.
Thank you. Thank you very much. We have a first question from Ricardo
Menendez March.
Thank you so much for your submission and for coming here to
engage with us. In your submission, you notice
that this didn't happen overnight and that there was a culture of bullying.
Would you mind explaining what your concerns are around
the effective erasure of psychosocial harm
in this piece of legislation?
Mm.
And why do you think it may be important to make sure that these things are
considered when it comes to small workplaces, just
workplaces in general, when it comes to health and safety policies?
I think, Sonia, you're probably best to speak to that.
What happened whenever anybody tried to raise an issue at Pike?
Oh. So,
in case you don't know, I had two sons in there.
So my second son, Daniel, is one of the two that
walked out, carried another man out.
He was only 24
at the time. He's now 40.
And he used to tell me all the time, and so did Ben, that
if they tried to raise any issues
around health and safety,
no matter how small or how big, they were told to just shut the F up and
get on with your job, basically. That was the mentality.
Mm.
If they complained to the CEO, he
turned around to a few miners that have told me that they were
frightened.
Mm.
They were scared that the mine was going to blow.
And
the CEO himself turned around and said, "If you don't like it, there's the
door. Leave. You're not in Australia now."
Mm.
And it's very hard in that context to think that the CEO would've
identified the appropriate critical risks under the financial pressure
they were under.
Thank you. Phil.
Thank you. Yeah, so much of what this bill does is it creates this
idea of critical risk.
Mm.
With the Pike situation,
was critical risk a part of what happened at Pike?
They probably didn't identify it as critical risk.
I'm sure every person
under there never ever thought that
what would happen happened. And so when
I was listening to those words earlier, I thought to myself,
"Everyone has different ideas of what a
critical risk is."
Mm.
So how do you have someone who identifies what is a
critical risk?
Mm.
In my mind,
things that you may not perceive as a critical risk may end up being a
critical risk. I think that there needs to be caution
with everything.
Mm.
In your submission, you identify slipping of standards, shortcuts, and a
lack of oversight.
Mm.
Would any of those things that added up to the Pike
scenario, would they have been defined as critical risks?
Mm.
I would think so.
There was a lot of things that were going on, and from our
perspective or from my perspective, if they'd had somebody there
constantly checking, as they should have been-
Yeah
... then possibly those things wouldn't have been allowed to happen.
Mm.
So for example,
in Australia,
Ms. Van Velden talked about people being afraid of WorkSafe.
Well, I'm sorry, they should be.
Mm.
In Australia, they are terri- when they come on site, because they can close a work
site down just like that.
That's right. Yeah.
And if there's a critical risk or a risk...
So they should.
Yep.
Mm.
And here, these guys barely saw
anyone, and when they did, they were signing things off
retrospectively, so signing that off and signing that off.
And then they'd have to do the job.
But of course, it never got done.
It was on a process line.
And that kind of speaks to point three of the submission,
this idea that you can both police and provide guidance and consultation. Mm.
Mm.
That's exactly what happened at Pike River.
Is that a conflict of interest in your view?
It's an absolute conflict of interest.
In fact, when we
took the case about what the Supreme Court eventually decided was an unlawful
bargain-
That's right
... with Peter Whelton, part of the disclosure was
correspondence between the two parties, where Whelton's lawyer was
basically saying, "You are complicit in this. We will drag you through.
You prosecute my client, we will drag you through the courts on this."
Mm.
I can't say for sure, but it feels to me that that was probably a
motivation towards an unlawful bargain.
Mm.
Yeah. And it was that Friday. It could've been a Monday, a
Wednesday, a Saturday, but it just happened to be a Friday afternoon,
and
it was almost like they were playing a game of Russian roulette.
Mm.
Production over safety. The CEO was under pressure
by the shareholders, and the miners were under pressure by the CEO
to get the production happening. And we know
that
two weeks before the explosion,
the methane in the mine peaked over 19 times.
So those 19 times, the men should've been
out of the mine,
until that mine re-ventilated,
they should not have been allowed to work.
But Whelton
And the managers there
wanted production to happen. He was under the pump.
There was a barge waiting for the coal to go to India, and
so the pressure was on. There was a bonus that was offered the
miners, not the contractors, just the miners, to get the
coal out. And so everyone sort of worked harder
not knowing that Friday was going to be their last day.
And now
I've lost my husband and my children have lost their
father, and he was a wonderful man.
Can I just say thank you so much for making yourselves available and being part of
this process? I know it's, as you say, 14 years and to have to
keep being here and being
the voice.
Thank you.
We appreciate it and know how hard it must be for you.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
We
now have Beca,
and we have Rob Jury. Thank you, Rob.
We have 10 minutes with you.
That includes time for questions.
Over to you.
Thank you. Look, thank you for
the opportunity to speak to you today, and we welcome any questions on
what we have to say.
My name is Rob Jury. I'm Beca's Chief Structural Engineer
and a participant in all matters associated with earthquake engineering over
my career spanning over 45 years. I was an expert
witness to the Royal Commission following the Christchurch earthquakes, and for the
last three decades have participated in the development
of codes, practice, and guidance to support
industry and government-led mitigation programs in New Zealand and
internationally. I've also provided advice to various
clients on matters relating to earthquake hazards and risks associated with
this.
My colleague, Julianne Spark, is the technical director in our structures team.
Julianne has also contributed significantly to the Beca client
advisory service on matters associated with earthquake hazards and
risks
during his career spanning two and a half decades.
Our submission is intended to be bipartisan in nature and is presented
on behalf of Beca, an employee-owned company operating globally
with over 2,600 New Zealand-based employees.
The submission is confined to the seismic provisions of the bill,
particularly the wording of the proposed Clause 3B, but perhaps also
including 3A,
under exception for seismic risk to workplace
buildings and how it interacts with the earthquake prone
building
regime, including part of a building and falling
hazards within workplaces.
Beca's submission makes no comment on other amendments.
Our broader views on this were provided through the New Zealand Business
Leaders' Health and Safety Forum submission, which I think has already been given
to this committee.
Beca agrees with the premise that the current legislation has led to
confusion for PCBUs on the responsibilities related
to how buildings could potentially perform in earthquakes,
and the often perverse reactions that can result.
For example, I have observed how the poor understanding of holistic seismic
risk has seen organizations that have found out the seismic
assessment of their workplace is lower than they deem desirable
immediately decamp to arguably a greater risk working from
home or to another building that may be no better
in risk terms.
Beca agrees that it is appropriate for the government to determine what constitutes
tolerable risk when hazards in the workplace are being considered.
Beca is therefore supportive of the removal of the earthquake performance of the
building itself from consideration when evaluating hazards
under the proposed Clause 3B, unless of course the earthquake prone
building obligations are not being met.
This provides clarity around the settings and intent for
PCBUs for the building as a whole. However,
we believe that including part of a building includes Clause
3B, but without specifically defining what this is
raises uncertainty given the previous use of this term.
Examples of elements that would have previously been considered part of a building
include lightweight roof systems that could experience localized failure,
fixed partitions, heavy items of plant, stairs, potential fall
hazards, and in and over egress
routes from the building, and items that could release hazardous materials
into the workplace.
These are all items that are known to potentially lead to injuries in all
levels of seismic shaking,
but are excluded from consideration within the proposed
EPB system.
So it's that interaction between the proposed EPB system and this
legislation that we're really referring to.
Are they intended to be hazards that should be addressed in this bill is a question
that we have. We think it's unclear.
These elements cannot always be addressed by a tenant and will be the
responsibility of the building owner.
Understanding the extent of the carve-out for both assessment of hazards
in the workplace and the responsibility of the PCBUs
in the event of a death occurring in the workplace as a result of a building item
that can only cause injuryOr fatalities result of seismic
activity is therefore particularly important when defining the
various responsibilities.
We strongly recommend that part of a building be defined in the bill, and
there be clarity on the status of hazards resulting from seismic activity.
We would have offered suggestions on possible definitions, but this requires
clarity around the intent and a full understanding
of the intended tolerable risk settings.
Whether or not potential falling hazards as a result of seismic activity are
included or exempted within critical hazards
needs to be clear, otherwise it will be left to the courts to decide, which is
not a desirable outcome.
We also note that many contents within the workplace are only a hazard when
considered from the perspective of their seismic performance.
That is, they can only fall or release hazardous contents as a result of seismic
activity.
We presume that it's not intended that these be removed from consideration under
the proposed act.
The fact that we're asking indicates potential lack of clarity.
Mm.
So thank you for listening, and we're happy to answer any questions.
Thank you very much. I don't appear to have a question lined up yet.
Oh, Pamjeet. Right.
A very quick one. So I see you have 2,600 plus employees.
There was a submitter who said that
big companies might try to game the system and try to remain small
PCBU by opening multiple sites kind of thing on multiple
kind of sub-organizations.
Mm-hmm.
What do you say to that?
Well, we have 2,650 employees spread out over New Zealand.
There are no,
of our offices that are less than 20 people.
So, we would always be a larger PCBU.
So I don't have any particular comment in relation to Weka on that-
Okay
... issue.
Thank you very much. Our lack of questions is not a lack of interest.
It's a very succinct and helpful-
Yeah
... submission. So we appreciate it.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
All right. We move now to the Bus and Coach Association.
James Kennelly.
Welcome. 10 minutes with you today, includes time for
questions. Over to you.
Thank you. Good morning, Chair and members.
Thanks for the opportunity to speak to our submission.
The Bus and Coach Association consists of over
180 members providing public transport, school buses, and
tour and coach and charter services.
Our members employ over 13,000 people.
We support the government's intent to reduce unnecessary compliance,
and focusing regulatory intention on preventing serious harm.
However, there are several proposed changes that raise
practical, operational, and risk management implications for the public passenger
transport sector.
Most of our concerns relate to two key areas,
the definition of critical risk,
and the proposed exemptions for small businesses.
We support the intent of the bill to prioritize critical risks,
shifting focus towards preventing serious harm.
Road transport consistently deals with hazards capable of causing
catastrophic harm, like vehicle collisions,
interaction with other road users, mechanical failures, in
depot and yard environments.
These clearly fit within the definition of critical risk.
According to ACC data, bus crashes result in over
1,000 accident claims annually in New Zealand as of 2025.
While this is comparably small compared to the rest of the transport sector, it
still is a large amount.
However, key risks like fatigue and
psychosocial harm, including
threats and verbal abuse, which drivers do often
encounter, may not meet the threshold for critical risk under the
new schedule,
yet they represent major contributors to incidents and long-term
harm in the transport industry.
In 2024, there were 19
fatal crashes,
80 serious injuries, and 447 minor
injuries where driver fatigue was a contributing factor on
the road.
We recommend the definition of critical risk in the bill needs to
be broadened and clearer to make it more usable in a real-world environment.
We believe key risks like fatigue and psychosocial harm
should not be deprioritized.
BCA also has concerns for the proposed exemptions for smaller businesses,
as smaller size does not equate to reduced risk, and some of the
proposed exemptions could create new problems rather than solving old ones.
In the passenger transport sector, operators of different sizes may
deliver identical services, creating inconsistent safety
obligations with a single supply chain.
For example, smaller operators may inadvertently misclassify risks and increase
accident exposure. Looking at our membership,
roughly 35% have only one to two
vehicles, and 60% have less than five
vehicles. So predominantly,
there is a majority who would have less than 20 employees.
We do not believe the evidence supports the small
PCBU category and have recommended that this
be removed from the bill.
While the Bus and Coach Association broadly supports the bill's overall goals,
we believe adjustments are necessary to ensure consistent, safe, and equitable
outcomes across the passenger transport sector. Thank you.
Thank you very much. As a former member, I'm going to give myself the first
questions.
Where you talked about the
fatigue risk-
Yeah
... do you see the work time rule and the legislation associated
with that contributing to this or do you think that that needs to be identified in
the legislation specifically?
I think there are already provisions a lot within that.
Mm.
Most of the bigger business, organizations already have a
lot of quite strict rules around-
Mm
... driver fatigue and number of hours.
It's probably the smaller businesses that where you've got one
person driving aCharter bus-
Mm.
Especially with the uptake in tourism.
Mm-hmm.
There's a lot of new kind of smaller members coming in.
They probably don't have the same kind of requirements-
Mm
... and safety. And so that's probably something to look at, and that's probably
where you'll get
drivers maybe driving a lot longer than they-
Yeah
... probably need to. And that would actually be unsafe.
And that brings me to my second question.
We've heard a lot about the small PCBU
item point.
Yeah.
For some industries, the idea of it works really well.
Do you see that rather than a small versus large
carve-out, that there might be industry carvens?
Yeah. I mean, for us, I guess it doesn't matter if you're driving, if you've
got one bus-
Yeah. Agree
... or 20 buses-
Mm-hmm
... you're going to still have the same critical risks-
Yeah
... and same other risks that you need to manage.
I would expect most of the sector would agree that
it creates an inconsistency, similar to what I think Engineering New
Zealand was saying, and also what I think, and I've seen
EMA's
submission as well, that there is a concern that that would create
inconsistency.
I think for transport sector, I would've thought if you're going to
have the small PCBUs, it probably would be a
carve-out for,
because a lot of the businesses are small-
Mm
... and they are often person operating one vehicle.
Thank you. Can I check, is yours a supplementary? And Grant it's yours.
Yes.
A supplementary or primary?
It's primary.
That's right, because Riccardo's got a primary.
Yeah.
So your supplementary.
So James, you've said that
the fatigue and psychosocial harm, including threats
and verbal abuse that your drivers are particularly
subject to
should not be deprioritized due to-
Yeah
... the new hierarchy, but-
Well, I mean, I think-
Inherently they will be. That's the-
Yeah
... that's the whole point of it, isn't it?
Yeah. And that's why they should be considered as critical
risk, and fatigue can cause harm and
And is it your understanding from your reading of the bill that
the actual physical violence that your drivers are too
frequently subjected to would be considered a critical risk or
not under the bill?
I was probably a bit vague on that, to be honest.
I think AT recently provided stats that it was about
200 or so-
Mm
... violent incidents in the last six years to bus drivers.
Mm.
There are obviously things that are being made, like screens
and
CCTV, and I think there's also a trial of safety
officers. But I don't know if this bill would
put that into account in the critical risks.
It's not quite clear-
Mm
... whether that is.
Thank you.
Thank you. Riccardo, meaning to start-
My question's been covered.
Okay. That's very helpful.
Sorry, Riccardo.
That's okay.
Grant, did you have one then?
Yeah, just pretty straightforward, actually.
You talk about the, as opposed to having, as highlighted, the
different sizes of businesses recognized, that
really the strengthening of approved codes of practice.
Do you think, would that help alleviate for those small businesses who feel a
little bit overwhelmed with the
safety requirements? Do you think it would make a difference if we get that right?
Yeah. And certainly we support the ASOTAS.
Yeah.
I think
especially if the sector can work with
the
NZTA and WorkSafe to kind of come up with some clear
guidance and some strict rules and
aligned with the land transport rules as well-
Yeah
... I think that's going to be critical.
Yeah.
So yeah, ensuring that consistency.
So.
Yeah.
It just seems odd that we haven't already done that.
Mm.
Well, yeah, I guess that was the intent originally, wasn't it?
And it's certainly something that needs to be done.
Mm, thank you.
Yeah. Thank you very much, James.
Thank you.
Appreciate your contribution.
And we will, members, move on to a break.
We will be back in-
Private session.
Yes, actually. Sorry, we have just a private matter of
business. But if we could clear the room, and we'll be back at
11:15 to start very promptly.
Let's just go to private session